## Introduction {.page_break_before}

### History

Cichlid fish in African lakes are a powerful model systems in speciation and adaptive evolutionary radiation research [@doi:10.1038/nrg1316; @doi:10.1098/rspb.2006.3539].
The functional decoupling of their oral and pharyngeal jaws is hypothesized to be a factor in making cichlids unusually versatile in their feeding and making it possible for making them able to adapt to a wide range of environmental factors.
[TODO]: # (Marcel would like to have a cidation here, "possibly Liem198xx")
The hypothesis is that the fusion of the lower pharyngeal jaws makes them powerful food processing tools, and this in turn releases the oral jaws from functional constraint.
The oral jaws no longer need to process prey and can therefore specialize on prey capture.

The group of Ole Seehausen has studied the evolutionary diversification of cichlid fish radiations in Lake Victoria in Africa since a long time [@doi:10.1098/rspb.2006.3539; @doi:10.1111/nph.13450].
We aim to to better understand the functional anatomy of the skulls and jaws in these fishes in order to test the functional decoupling and other hypotheses about what may facilitate exceptionally high rates of morphological evolution.

The corpus of cichlid fish available is extremely valuable, hence a nondestructive imaging method is paramount for studying these samples.
Since micro–computed tomography can be regarded as nondestructive method for biological samples, it is a very well suited method for investigating the oral and pharyngeal jaws as well as the skull features of the fishes presented in this study.

[TODO]: # (Describe how the cichlids came from from Lake Victoria to Kastanienbaum and to the Institute of Anatomy)
[TODO]: # (Is there some information on the sample 'library' of the EAWAG?)
[TODO]: # (Add some information on the backstory of those fishes, and maybe publications relating to the corpus of fishes)

### Micro-computed tomography

X-ray microtomography is a valuable tool to gain insights into the inner structure of very diverse samples, namely for specimens related to research done in the biomedical sciences.
X-ray microtomography has been employed as a method of choice to nondestructively assess the morphology of different kind of fishes, large and small.
For a small samples of examples, see prior work of the authors [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0228333;@https://osf.io/ecmz4] ^[For which David made a tomographic scan of an adult zebrafish ages ago.].

Depending on the structures of interest, biomedical samples are often tomographically scanned after the tissue/sample has been stained with a contrast agent, most often employing contrast agents containing heavy metals.
Since the structures of interest for the two studies we touch upon in this manuscript (cichlid teeth and skulls) display large enough contrast to the surrounding tissue we did not stain our samples prior to the tomographic imaging presented here.

[TODO]: # (Mention the `fishguy` some more? [@https://www.washington.edu/storycentral/story/uw-professor-is-digitizing-every-fish-species-in-the-world].)