## Discussion {.page_break_before}

We acquired high resolution tomographic datasets of a large collection of cichlids (N=133), several tomographic scans were performed for each specimen.
The 372 acquired datasets were imaged over a wide-spanning range of voxel sizes (3.5--50 μm), permitting both the analysis of fine details we wanted to resolve (i.e. containing only the oral and pharyngeal jaws) and having datasets (N=104) containing the whole head for principle components analysis and extraction of the otoliths.
In our microCT imaging setup the resulting voxel size is directly correlated with the sample diameter, i.e. smaller specimen were scanned with the smallest voxel size, in the range of several μm.
The skulls of larger specimen were scanned with the largest voxel sizes, in the range of several tens of μm.
The chosen voxel size is thus specimen- and scan-specific, and was always selected such that the desired region of interest fits into the available lateral field of view of the microCT machine at the smallest necessary voxel size to resolve the structures of interest.

### Imaging and preparation for analysis

The whole study we presented here spanned a *long* time frame.
It was thus paramount to run the imaging process and the preparation of the tomographic datasets in a batched mode.
The *Jupyter* notebook written to prepare the datasets for quality control and analysis were facilitating a short turnaround time for feedback on single scans and such a batched analysis.

### Otolith extraction

The method to extract the otoliths from the tomographic dataset works robustly for all of the different fish sizes and shapes.
The extraction is robust because it is based on a combination of distinct details of the gray value curve over the different anatomical directions.
The details of the otolith extraction method have been extensively tuned and run in a fully automated way.
This allows a highly reproducible and unbiased extraction of the otoliths from the tomographic datasets.
This is even the case for one fish which was scanned with a hook still in it’s mouth, where the otoliths were nonetheless automatically extracted without any issue.

Data on such automatically extracted otoliths, like volume and geometric information like eccentricity and moments of inertia is biologically interesting as the otoliths grow with the age of the fish.
One could help estimate the age of wild fishes using a calibration based on the otolith measurements of a fish of known age.
It is worth noting that the estimation of age in tropical fishes are not as simple as for fishes from temperate regions, where one can distinguish summer and winter layers within the otolith [@doi:10.1126/science.173.4002.112].

To the best of our knowledge, no fully automated method for non-destructive otolith extraction from high-resolution tomographic data has been published up to now.
Vasconcelos-Filho et al. [@doi:10.3389/fmars.2019.00728] show a potentially objective method to count growth rings in otoliths of six fish species, but performed their study on extracted otoliths "embedded in a Styrofoam cube", while our method non-destructively extracts the otoliths from the tomographic data.
Gu et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.micron.2022.103342] also provide detailed insight into otoliths and combine microtomographic imaging (with unknown voxel size) with scanning electron microscopy.
However, they also mention that the "otoliths were removed [from *Bahaba taipingensis*], cleaned and kept dry for morphologic observation".

### Outlook

The acquired tomographic datasets are the basis for multiple additional analyses of fish morphology.

The presented method offers an insight and algorithm on how to perform tomographic scans, preview and analyze micro-computer tomographic datasets of a large collection of fish.
The workflow is relying only on free and open-source software and can thus be used and verified independently by any interested reader.
All the *Jupyter* notebook described herein is also freely available online [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.6798632].
